docs: Add initial usage docs for oobmigration (#18657)
sourcegraph/sourcegraph: doc/dev/background-information/oobmigrations.md

# Developing an out-of-band migration

> Our primary mechanism applies a sequence of pure-SQL migrations (each in a transaction) to the database on application startup. This happens to block the new application version from reaching a working state until all migrations since the previous version have been applied. This is generally a non-issue as most schema migrations fast, and _most_ data migrations are fast enough to apply on application startup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Normal migrations apply a sequence of pure-SQL migrations (each in a transaction) to the database on application startup. This happens to block the new application version from reaching a working state until all migrations since the previous version have been applied. This is generally a non-issue as most schema migrations fast, and _most_ data migrations are fast enough to apply on application startup.
```

> Some data migrations may require application-specific logic that can't be easily performed within a SQL command. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Out-of-band migrations allow for application-specific logic to exist in a migration that can't be easily performed within a SQL command. For example:
```

- generating key pairs
- re-hashing passwords
- decoding and interpreting opaque payloads
- fetching data from another remote API or data store based on existing data

> Additionally, the estimated _scale_ of data may be too large to migrate on application startup in an efficient manner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, the estimated _scale_ of data may be too large to migrate on application startup in an efficient manner - in which case an out of band migration is suitable.
```

- an affected _component_ (e.g. `codeintel-db.lsif_data_documents`)
- a human-readable _description_ (e.g. `Populate num_diagnostics from gob-encoded payload`)
- the version when the migration was _introduced_ (e.g. `3.25.0`)
- the version when the migration was _deprecated_ (if any)
- a flag indicating whether or not the migration is _non-destructive_

Each out-of-band migration is associated with a _migrator_ instance, which periodically runs in the background of Sourcegraph instances between the version the migration was _introduced_ (inclusive) and the version the migration was marked as _deprecated_ (exclusive). Each migrator instance enables three behaviors:

- Perform a batch of the migration
- Perform a batch of the migration _in reverse_
- Determine the percentage of data that has been migrated

For every registered migrator, the migration runner will periodically check for the migration progress (even if it's finished). If the migrator has more work to do, then the runner will periodically have it perform a batch of the migration in the background. Errors that occur during migrations are logged to teh migration record and are exposed to the site-admin.

#### Upgrades

> It is not valid for a user to upgrade beyond the version that an incomplete migration is deprecated. Site-admin must wait for these migrations to finish before an upgrade. Otherwise, the instance will have data in a format that is no longer readable by the new version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Site admins will be prevented from upgrading beyond the version where an incomplete migration has been deprecated. i.e., site-admin must wait for these migrations to finish before an upgrade. Otherwise, the instance will have data in a format that is no longer readable by the new version.
```

> [In the future](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/issues/18240), we'll ensure that the instance gives plenty of warnings prior to an upgrade and ensure the instance does not start in such an invalid state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today, this is not actually enforced - [in the future](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/issues/18240), we'll ensure that the instance gives plenty of warnings prior to an upgrade and ensure the instance does not start in such an invalid state.
```

> Today, this is not actually enforced - [in the future](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/issues/18240), we'll ensure that the instance gives plenty of warnings prior to an upgrade and ensure the instance does not start in such an invalid state.

Reviewer 2: Often customers have not upgraded in a long time (think 3.15 -> 3.27) and want to upgrade as quickly as possible. 
What should @sourcegraph/distribution & @sourcegraph/cse watch out for when customers are trying to upgrade through versions as fast as possible.

Author: Nothing is currently deprecated and we'll try to address the concerns and tag distribution/cs in https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/20967 once this will become a concern. Right now all migrations will run at all versions after they are introduced so this is not a worry atm.

Reviewer 2: 🙌 Great! Thank you!

#### Downgrades

> If a migration is non-destructive (it only adds data), then it is safe to downgrade to a previous version. If a migration is destructive (it removes or changes the shape of data), then the migration must be run _in reverse_. We can do this by flipping the direction of the migration record. The runner takes care of the rest.

Reviewer 3: How does that work? Is this currently supported?

Author: Heck yes it is. It checks the `apply_reverse` flag on the migration and will run it to 0% by calling `Down`. Right now the way the user has to trigger this is via GraphQL query (site-admin only). Writing these docs made me realize that it's a subtle problem: https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/issues/18659
